Reworded all the docs related to templates and Twig (#12274)
symfony/symfony-docs: templates.rst

.. index::
   single: Templating

Creating and Using Templates
============================

A template is a text file that can generate any text-based format (HTML, XML,
CSV, etc.). For example, in a web application that displays some news, you can
create a text file (e.g. ``news.php``) with the HTML structure and PHP logic of
all news pages. Then, a :doc:`Symfony controller </controllers>` can *render*
that ``news.php`` template passing the contents of each news to generate the
resulting HTML contents sent to the user.

Templates were traditionally created with PHP, but in Symfony applications they

> are created with Twig, a flexible, fast, and secure template engine.

Reviewer: I think we can shorten all of this (and yes, I probably wrote at least part of this longer version originally - but times have changed):

```rst
A template is *the* best way to organize & render HTML from inside your application, whether you need to
render HTML from a :doc:`controller </controllers>` or generate the :doc:`contents of an email </mailer>`.
Templates in Symfony are created with Twig: a flexible, fast, and secure template engine.
```

.. _twig-language:

Twig Templating Language
------------------------

> `Twig`_ templating language allows you to write concise, readable templates that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `Twig`_ templating language allows you to write concise, readable templates that
```

are more friendly to web designers and, in several ways, more powerful than PHP
templates. Take a look at the following Twig template example. Even if it's the
first time you see Twig, you probably understand most of it:

.. code-block:: html+twig

    <!DOCTYPE html>
    <html>
        <head>
            <title>Welcome to Symfony!</title>
        </head>
        <body>
            <h1>{{ page_title }}</h1>

            {# this is the main navigation menu #}
            <ul id="navigation">
                {% for item in navigation %}
                    <li><a href="{{ item.href }}">{{ item.caption }}</a></li>
                {% endfor %}
            </ul>
        </body>

>     </html>

Reviewer: I think we should only show the h1 through the ul (not the whole template body) because it's not realistic to have the entire HTML template inside a single file.

Author: I've simplified the example a bit ... but I haven't removed everything, because the purpose of this example is to have at least one occurrence of each of the 3 main Twig constructs: ``{{ ... }}``, ``{% ... %}`` and ``{# ... #}``.

Twig syntax is based on these three constructs:

* ``{{ ... }}``, used to display the content of a variable or the result of
  evaluating an expression;
* ``{% ... %}``, used to run some logic, such as a conditional or a loop;
* ``{# ... #}``, used to add comments to the template (unlike HTML comments,
  these comments are not included in the rendered page).

You can't run PHP code inside Twig templates, but Twig provides utilities to

> run some logic in the templates. For example, **filters** modify contents before

Reviewer: ```suggestion
run some logic in the templates. For example, **filters** modify content before
```

> being rendered, like the ``upper`` filter to uppercase contents:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
being rendered, like the ``upper`` filter to uppercase content:
```

.. code-block:: twig

    {{ title|upper }}

Twig comes with a long list of `tags`_, `filters`_ and `functions`_ that are
available by default. In Symfony applications you can also use these
:doc:`Twig filters and functions defined by Symfony </reference/twig_reference>`
and you can :doc:`create your own Twig filters and functions </templating/twig_extension>`.

Twig is fast in the ``prod`` :doc:`environment <configuration-environments>`
(because templates are compiled into PHP and cached automatically), but
convenient to use in the ``dev`` environment (because templates are recompiled
automatically when you change them).

Twig Configuration
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> Twig defines several configuration options to define things like the format used

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Twig has several configuration options to define things like the format used
```

to display numbers and dates, the template caching, etc. Read the
:doc:`Twig configuration reference </reference/configuration/twig>` to learn about them.

Creating Templates
------------------

> Template Naming

Reviewer: This section needs to start with a concrete, simple example of using a template - e.g. from a controller, render a template, pass in 1 or 2 variables, and print them in the template. Some of the information below - specifically "naming conventions" & "template location" might be able to be reduced partially or complete to notes or code comments within those examples. Basically, we're doing a lot of "telling them about naming/location" but no showing.

Author: I agree that we're missing a basic but complete example at the beginning. I've just added it. I don't fully agree that we can move lots of explanations into comments, because it's too long and we can't do cool things such as linking to other articles.

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Symfony recommends the following for template names:

* Use `snake case`_ for filenames and directories (e.g. ``blog_posts.twig``,
  ``admin/default_theme/blog/index.twig``, etc.);
* Define two extensions for filenames (e.g. ``index.html.twig`` or
  ``blog_posts.xml.twig``) being the first extension (``html``, ``xml``, etc.)
  the final format that the template will generate.

Although templates usually generate HTML contents, they can generate any
text-based format. That's why the two-extension convention simplifies the way
templates are created and rendered for multiple formats.

For example, if the route includes the :ref:`special _format routing parameter <routing-format-parameter>`
(e.g. ``/index.{_format}``) you can browse different URLs (``/index.html``,
``/index.xml``, ``/index.json``) to render different templates.

Although Symfony doesn't select the template automatically based on the request
format, you can do that yourself. Instead of rendering the ``'index.html.twig'``
template, if your application supports different formats, you can render

> ``'index.'.$format.'.twig'``, where ``$format = $request->getRequestFormat()``.

Reviewer: I think the whole format thing is not relevant anymore. At best, this is a small section that comes way later. I think almost nobody should use templates to render json, xml, etc anymore.

Template Location
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Templates are stored by default in the ``templates/`` directory. When a service
or controller renders the ``product/index.html.twig`` template, they are actually
referring to the ``<your-project>/templates/product/index.html.twig`` file.

The default templates directory is configurable with the
:ref:`twig.default_path <config-twig-default-path>` option and you can add more
template directories :ref:`as explained later <templates-namespaces>` in this article.

> Template Variables

Reviewer: If we start this section with a nice, real-world example, then this can become (or at least continue) that example. For... example, if the initial example shows passing in a simple string variable and printing it, this section could be called `Accessing Object Data in Twig` and it would pass a new `comment` variable from the controller into Twig, and then show how to access its data.

all kinds of PHP variables. Consider the following template:

.. code-block:: html+twig

    <p>{{ user.name }} added this comment on {{ comment.publishedAt|date }}</p>

The ``user.name`` notation means that you want to display some information
(``name``) stored in a variable (``user``). Is ``user`` an array or an object?
Is ``name`` a property or a method? In Twig this doesn't matter.

When using the ``foo.bar`` notation, Twig tries to get the value of the variable
in the following order:

#. ``$foo['bar']`` (array and element);
#. ``$foo->bar`` (object and public property);
#. ``$foo->bar()`` (object and public method);
#. ``$foo->getBar()`` (object and *getter* method);
#. ``$foo->isBar()`` (object and *isser* method);
#. ``$foo->hasBar()`` (object and *hasser* method);
#. If none of the above exists, use ``null``.

This allows to evolve your application code without having to change the
template code (you can start with array variables for the application proof of
concept, then move to objects with methods, etc.)

.. _templates-link-to-pages:

Linking to Pages
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Linking to other pages from templates is required to build web sites and

> applications. Instead of writing the link URLs by hand, use the ``path()``

Reviewer: We can remove the first sentence

        </routes>

    .. code-block:: php

        // config/routes.php
        use App\Controller\BlogController;
        use Symfony\Component\Routing\Loader\Configurator\RoutingConfigurator;

        return function (RoutingConfigurator $routes) {
            $routes->add('blog_index', '/')
                ->controller([BlogController::class, 'index'])
            ;

            $routes->add('blog_post', '/articles/{slug}')
                ->controller([BlogController::class, 'show'])
            ;
        };

Use the ``path()`` Twig function to link to these pages and pass the route name
as the first argument and the route parameters as the optional second argument:

.. code-block:: html+twig

    <a href="{{ path('blog_index') }}">Homepage</a>

    {# ... #}

    {% for post in blog_posts %}
        <h1>
            <a href="{{ path('blog_post', {slug: post.slug}) }}">{{ post.title }}</a>
        </h1>

        <p>{{ post.excerpt }}</p>
    {% endfor %}

The ``path()`` function generates relative URLs. If you need to generate
absolute URLs (for example when rendering templates for emails or RSS feeds),
use the ``url()`` function, which takes the same arguments as ``path()``

> (e.g. ``<a href="{{ url('blog_index') }}"> ... </a>``).

Reviewer: This entire section is repeated in the routing chapter. https://symfony.com/doc/current/routing.html#generating-urls-in-templates

Probably we should keep this new section here. Then, in routing, we keep the `Generating URLs in Templates` (so it's findable), but link here.

.. _templates-link-to-assets:

Linking to CSS, JavaScript and Image Assets
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Templates usually link to images, JavaScript, stylesheets and other assets.
Instead of writing the asset URLs by hand, use the ``asset()`` function to

> generate the URLs.

Reviewer: ```rst
If a template needs to link to a static asset (e.g. an image), Symfony provides an ``asset()`` Twig
function to help generate that URL. First, install the *asset*` package:
```

To use this function, install the *asset* package:

.. code-block:: terminal

    $ composer require symfony/asset

You can now use the ``asset()`` function:

.. code-block:: html+twig

>     <img src="{{ asset('images/logo.png') }}" alt="Symfony!"/>

Reviewer: Above this, add a comment where the source file is located

```rst
{# if file lives at "public/images/logo.png" #}
```

    <link href="{{ asset('css/blog.css') }}" rel="stylesheet"/>

    <script src="{{ asset('bundles/acme/js/loader.js') }}"></script>

The ``asset()`` function's main purpose is to make your application more portable.
If your application lives at the root of your host (e.g. ``https://example.com``),

> then the rendered paths should be ``/images/logo.png``. But if your application

Reviewer: ```suggestion
then the rendered path would be ``/images/logo.png``. But if your application
```

lives in a subdirectory (e.g. ``https://example.com/my_app``), each asset path

> should render with the subdirectory (e.g. ``/my_app/images/logo.png``). The

Reviewer: ```suggestion
will render with the subdirectory (e.g. ``/my_app/images/logo.png``). The
```

Author: Because of how the phrase is redacted, I think `should` is more correct. The phrase structure is: *"if the app is in the root dir, assets should [...] but if the app is in a subdir, assets should [...] The assets() function takes care of this."*

``asset()`` function takes care of this by determining how your application is

> being used and generating the correct paths accordingly.

Reviewer: I think the Encore tip should move up here.

.. tip::

    The ``asset()`` function supports various cache busting techniques via the
    :ref:`version <reference-framework-assets-version>`,
    :ref:`version_format <reference-assets-version-format>`, and
    :ref:`json_manifest_path <reference-assets-json-manifest-path>` configuration options.

> If you need absolute URLs for assets, use the ``absolute_url()`` Twig function

Reviewer: Super minor, but `absolute_url()` is also covered (briefly) in `reference/twig_reference.rst`. Probably a little bit of duplication is ok...

as follows:

.. code-block:: html+twig

    <img src="{{ absolute_url(asset('images/logo.png')) }}" alt="Symfony!"/>

.. tip::

    Read the :doc:`Symfony's Webpack Encore documentation </frontend>` to learn

>     about integrating modern asset building features into Symfony applications.

Reviewer: ```
If you'd like help packaging, versioning & minifying your JavaScript & CSS assets in
a modern way, read about :doc:`Symfony's Webpack Encore </frontend>`.
```

.. _twig-app-variable:

The App Global Variable
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> Symfony creates for each request a context variable which is injected in every

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Symfony creates a context object that is injected into every
```

Twig template automatically as a variable called ``app``. It provides access to
some application information:

.. code-block:: html+twig

    <p>Username: {{ app.user.username ?? 'Anonymous user' }}</p>
    {% if app.debug %}
        <p>Request method: {{ app.request.method }}</p>
        <p>Application Environment: {{ app.environment }}</p>
    {% endif %}

The ``app`` variable (which is an instance of :class:`Symfony\\Bridge\\Twig\\AppVariable`)
gives you access to these variables:

``app.user``
    The representation of the :ref:`current user <create-user-class>` or ``null``
    if there is none. The value stored in this variable can be a
    :class:`Symfony\\Component\\Security\\Core\\User\\UserInterface` object, any

>     other object which implements a ``__toString()`` method or even a regular string.

Reviewer: I think we should completely stop supporting anyone who is setting the user to anything other than a User object.

```rst
The :ref:`current user object <create-user-class>` or ``null`` if
the user is not authenticated.
```

And that's it.

``app.request``
    The :class:`Symfony\\Component\\HttpFoundation\\Request` object that stores
    the current :ref:`request data <accessing-request-data>` (depending on your
    application, this can be a :ref:`sub-request <http-kernel-sub-requests>`
    or a regular request).
``app.session``
    The :class:`Symfony\\Component\\HttpFoundation\\Session\\Session` object that
    represents the current :doc:`user's session </sessions>` or ``null`` if there is none.
``app.flashes``
    An array of all the :ref:`flash messages <flash-messages>` stored in the session.
    You can also get only the messages of some type (e.g. ``app.flashes('notice')``).
``app.environment``
    The name of the current :ref:`configuration environment <configuration-environments>`
    (``dev``, ``prod``, etc).
``app.debug``
    True if in :ref:`debug mode <debug-mode>`. False otherwise.
``app.token``
    A :class:`Symfony\\Component\\Security\\Core\\Authentication\\Token\\TokenInterface`

>     object representing the security token.

Reviewer: I wonder if we should just show an example of all of these in the above code block with a tiny Twig comment above each one - e.g.

```rst
{# app.request returns the Request object #}
Request method: {{ app.request.method }}
```

Author: I thought about that ... but `app.` gives you access to so many variables that the example could be complex (to show flash messages, security token, etc.)

> .. tip::

Reviewer: Maybe just move this as normal text.

    In addition to the global ``app`` variable injected by Symfony, you can also
    :doc:`inject variables automatically to all Twig templates </templating/global_variables>`.

> Rendering Templates

Reviewer: I think having a "Rendering Templates" header after "Creating Templates" is fine. But as I've mentioned, in "Creating Templates", we should already show how to render templates from a controller... because if we don't do this, all those examples are missing half their context.

In this section then, we probably won't need `Rendering Templates in Controllers`, or it just references above.

-------------------

> Rendering Templates in Routes

Reviewer: I think this should be lower, and be called:

> Rendering a Template Directly from a Route

... and in general, I like "Rendering a Template in..." over "Rendering Templates in..."
